---
title: Yamaha XT600 vs. Moto Guzzi 850 T3
layout: post
date: 2024-07-26 06:46:04
categories: motorcycles
canonical_url:
---

This is the comparison that everyone has waited for. It is hard to believe that these two bikes have never been compared before. It has always been the biggest rivalry in the history of motorcycles. The one duel to rule them all.

Or maybe not.

I am pretty sure this is the first time anyone has ever done this comparison. Because these two bikes are as different as they get. For one there is exactly 10 years between them. The Moto Guzzi 850 T3 California is from 1977 and the Yamaha XT600 is from 1987. Secondly are very diffent in their design. One is an old italian cruiser, perhaps even early sports bike, the other is a japanese off roader. 

The reason why I put the head-to-head is of course not to crown a winner or try to decide which one to buy, because I already own both of them. The reason is that I have switched a bit back and forth between the two of them recently and wanted to put some words on my thought on their individual strength and weaknesses. And all differendes aside I actually see a reason why you could put these two head to head as there is a discipline they both compete in where they could be competitors. 

But we will get to that later.

## Moto Guzzi 850 T3 California

First a few words on what has become my favorite motorcycle. When you read about them online there is almost always someone who mentions that Moto Guzzies have to grow on you. You won't get it initially. For some reason this almost exactly mirrors my experience. 

Initially I wanted an old Triumph. I had even found one that I really liked, but I came to the conclusion that I had to have one eventually, but it had to wait until a point where I had a garage. At that time I lived in an apartment and had nowhere to work on a bike apart from my parents house that is an hours drive away. 

So with the Triumph on pause for later, I searched online for reliable pre-1980 motorcycles that were not 4 cylinder bikes, as I already owned a Kawasaki KZ650 at that point. I can remember I read up on old BMW's and for a short while had one of those as a candidate. But I remember reading a number of comments suggesting a Moto Guzzi instead as they were just as reliable but had a lot more character than the BMW.

Up until that point I knew almost nothing about Moto Guzzi's apart from the fact that it was only old men riding them - and "old" was not a label I wanted to put on myself. It had however planted a seed and I went to look at a red Moto Guzzi Le Mans. My god it was sexy! So the attraction was there. But I could also tell that this exact bike was not the right match. It looked like someone has put lipstick on a pig. The final nail in the coffin came when I tried to sit on it. I just did not fit. The narrow low pulled back handlebars together with the rearsets made for such an uncomfortable position that I almost immediately had to abandon ship.

For some reason the experience with the Le Mans had not discouraged me totally from looking at Guzzies. A few weeks later I found another one, this one in black. But the big difference here was that this was a T3 California in almost original condition. This means floor boards, nice wide seat and upright handlebars. Here I fit perfectly. To cut the whole story a bit short I ended up haggling a bit on price and buy this bike. I knew absolutely nothing about Moto Guzzies and had never before ridden one - but the sound of that engine, even with the stock exhaust just spoke to me.

## Head-to-head

Where these two could compete on common ground is in the discipline of overlanding or long distance travel. 

I can even mention two books where each of them plays a key role in the endeavour. One is "These are the days that must happen to you" by Dan Walsh, here a Yamaha XT600 is the vehicle of choice for his trip across Africa. The other is "Going the wrong way" by Chris Donaldson where his vehicle of choice actually is a Moto Guzzi 850 although a Le Mans instead of a California.


